Add ARIA blog post (#3631)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/aria-poison-or-antidote/index.md

---
title: |
  ARIA: poison or antidote?
subhead: |

>   How lying to screen readers cures accessibility, when it doesn't rub salt in it.

Author: ```suggestion
  How lying to screen readers cures accessibility, when it doesn't rub salt in it!
```

authors:
  - aaronlevanthal

> date: 2020-08-04

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-08-11
```

description: |

>   How lying to screen readers cures accessibility, when it doesn't rub salt in it.

Author: ```suggestion
  How lying to screen readers cures accessibility, when it doesn't rub salt in it!
```

there is a 30% full glue gun there. 

The web equivalent to this is to take a plain box element (a div) with an image inside of it, and
use ARIA to say it's a slider at value 30 out of 100.

## What isn't ARIA?

ARIA does not affect the appearance of a web page, or the behavior for a mouse or keyboard user.
Only users of assistive technologies will notice any difference from ARIA. Web developers can add
any arbitrary ARIA without affecting users that aren't running an assistive technology (AT).

You read it right: ARIA doesn't actually do anything to keyboard focus or tab order. That's all done
in HTML, sometimes tweaked with bits of JavaScript.

## How does ARIA work?

Browsers gets asked by a screen reader or other assistive technology for information about each
element. When ARIA is present on an element, the browser takes in the ARIA information and changes
what it tells the screen reader about that element.

## Why ARIA?

Why would we ever want to lie to our users!?

Let's say the local web store doesn't sell all the widgets we need. But, we are
[MacGyver](https://www.cbs.com/shows/macgyver/), dammit. We can just invent our own widgets from
other widgets! FWIW, the

> [seven most used things MacGyver makes use of](https://www.cbs.com/shows/macgyver/news/1005839/the-notorious-tools-of-macgyver-s-trade/)

Author: ```suggestion
[MacGyver's seven most used things](https://www.cbs.com/shows/macgyver/news/1005839/the-notorious-tools-of-macgyver-s-trade/)
```

    JavaScript.
+   If the user presses the <kbd>Enter</kbd> key, we can treat it just like a click, and perform
    the appropriate action (or even open another menu).
+   If the user presses a key that should do something else, don't eat that!
    Throw it back to the page as nature intended. For example, our menubar
    doesn't need the <kbd>Tab</kbd> key, so throw it back! This is hard to get
    right, and authors often mess it up. For example, the menubar needs arrow
    keys, but not <kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>Arrow</kbd> or
    <kbd>Command</kbd>+</kbd>Arrow</kbd>. Those are shortcuts for moving to the
    previous/next page in the web history of your browser tab. If the author
    isn't careful, the menubar will eat those. This kind of bug happens a lot,
    and we haven't even started with ARIA yet!

### Screen reader access to our menubar

Our menu bar was created with duct tape and divs. As a result, a screen reader has no idea what any
of it is. The background color for the active item is just a color. The menu item divs are just
plain objects with no particular meaning. As such, a user of our menubar doesn't get any

> instructions of what keys to press or what item they're on.

Author: ```suggestion
instructions about what keys to press or what item they're on.
```

But that's no fair! The menu bar acts just fine for the sighted user. 

> ARIA to the rescue. ARIA lets us pretend to the screen reader and convince it that focus is in a

Author: ```suggestion
ARIA to the rescue. ARIA lets us pretend to the screen reader that focus is in a
```

`aria-activedescendant="settings-menuitem"`. This little white lie causes the screen reader to
consider our ARIA active item as the focus, which is read aloud or shown on a Braille display. 

A word on the _ancestor_, _parent_, and _descendant_ terminology. The term descendant refers to the
fact that an item is contained somewhere inside of another. The reverse term is ancestor, which is
to say an item is contained by ancestors. For the next container up/down, these may use the more
specific terms parent/child. For example, imagine a document with a paragraph that has a link
inside. The link's parent is a paragraph, but it also has the document as an ancestor. And in
reverse, the document may have many paragraph children, each with links. The links are all
descendants of the grandparent document.

Back to `aria-activedescendant`. By using it to point from the focused menubar to a specific menu
item,  the screen reader now knows where the user has moved, but nothing else about the object. What
is this div thing anyway? That's where the role attribute comes in. We use `role="menubar"` on the
containing element for the entire thing, then we use `role="menu"` on groups of items, and

> `role="menuitem"` on … drumroll … the individual menu items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`role="menuitem"` on (drumroll) the individual menu items.
```

Reviewer: The mac screen reader rolls through the periods of elipsis as though they're not present. A pause would be nice. How does it handle parens?

Author: ```suggestion
`role="menuitem"` on—drumroll—the individual menu items.
```

Author: When I compare `on drumroll the` with `on… drumroll… the` I hear a pause

And what if the menuitem can lead to a child menu? The user needs to know that right? For a sighted
user, there might be a little picture of a triangle at the end of the menu, but the screen reader
doesn't know how to automatically read images, at least at this point. We can add
`aria-expanded="false"` on each expandable menuitem to indicate that 1) there is something that can
be expanded, and 2) it currently is not expanded. As an added touch the author should put
`role="none"` on the img triangle to indicate it's for prettification purposes only. This prevents

> the screen reader from saying anything annoying about the image that would be redundant at best.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the screen reader from saying anything about the image that would be redundant at best and possibly annoying.
```

## Dealing with bugs

### Keyboard bugs (HTML!)

Although keyboard access is a part of core HTML, authors mess it up all the time, either because
they don't use keyboard navigation all that much, or because there is much nuance to get right. 

Examples of bugs:

+   A checkbox uses spacebar to toggle, but the author forgot to call `preventDefault()`. Now
    the spacebar will both toggle the checkbox and page down, which is the default browser behavior
    for spacebar.
+   An ARIA modal dialog wants to trap tab navigation inside of it, and the author forgets to
    specifically allow <kbd>Control</kbd>+<kbd>Tab</kbd> through to the browser. Now,
    <kbd>Control</kbd>+<kbd>Tab</kbd> just navigates within their dialog, and doesn't switch tabs
    in the browser as it should. Ugh.
+   An author creates a selection list, and implements up/down, but does not implement

>     home/end/pageup/pagedown or first letter navigation. Authors should follow known patterns.
>     Check out the [Resources](#resources) section for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    home/end/pageup/pagedown or first letter navigation. 
    
Authors should follow known patterns. Check out the [Resources](#resources) section for more information.
```

Reviewer: The last two lines apply to the whole list so don't attach them to the last item.

> For pure keyboard access issues, it's useful to also try without a screen reader, or with virtual

Reviewer: What am I trying? My webpage or app?

> browser mode off. Screen readers are not generally necessary to exhibit a keyboard bug, and keyboard

Reviewer: >exhibit a keyboard bug

maybe "uncover a keyboard bug"?

Author: ```suggestion
browser mode off. Screen readers are not generally necessary to discover keyboard bugs, and keyboard
```

access is actually implemented with HTML, not ARIA. After all, ARIA doesn't affect basic stuff like
the keyboard or mouse behavior, it only lies to the screen reader about what's in the web page,
what's currently focused, etc. 

Keyboard bugs are almost always a bug in the web content, specifically in their HTML and JavaScript,
not in ARIA.

> ### ARIA bugs… why are there so many?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ARIA bugs: why are there so many?
```

> There are many, many places where authors can get ARIA wrong, and each will lead to either complete

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a myriad of places where authors can get ARIA wrong, and each will lead to either complete
```

Reviewer: A writing best practice is to use more definite words than to repeat them.

breakage or subtle differences. The subtle ones are probably worse, because the author won't catch

> most of them on their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most of them before publishing.
```

Reviewer: I'm not in love with my wording. I found "on their own" to be vague and think it needs to be changed. I think you're saying the author will not catch the errors him or herself. Leaving it off will also solve the problem.

After all, unless the author is an experienced screen reader user, something is going to go wrong in

> the ARIA. In our menubar, the author could think the "option" role was to be used when "menuitem"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ARIA. In our menu bar example, the author could think the "option" role was to be used when "menuitem"
```

was correct. They could forget to use `aria-expanded`, forget to set and clear
`aria-activedescendant` at the right times, or forget to have a menubar containing the other menus.
And what about menu item counts? Usually menu items are presented by screen readers with something

> like "item 3 of 5" so that the user knows where they are. This is generally counted automatically by
> the browser, but in some cases, and in some browser - screen reader combinations, the wrong numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
like "item 3 of 5" so that the user knows where they are. The browser generally counts these automatically, but in some cases. In some browser-screen reader combinations, the wrong numbers
```

> might be computed, and the author needs to override these numbers with `aria-posinset` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might be computed, and the author would need to override these numbers with `aria-posinset` and
```

`aria-setsize`.

And this is just menu bars. Think of how many kinds of widgets there are. Glance at the ARIA spec or
authoring practices if you like. For each pattern, there are a dozen ways ARIA could be misused.
ARIA relies on authors to know what they're doing. What could possibly go wrong, given that most
authors are not screen reader users?

> In other words, it is 100% necessary for actual screen reader users to try ARIA widgets out before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, it is 100 percent necessary for actual screen reader users to try ARIA widgets before
```

they're considered shippable. There's too much nuance. Ideally everything would be tried with

> several different browser - screen reader combinations, because of the numerous implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
several different browser-screen reader combinations, because of the numerous implementation
```

quirks, in addition to a few incomplete implementations.

### File bug on Chrome or on web content?

For our team, which works on Chrome, we need to know when our representation of truth doesn't match
what's provided by other browsers. When NVDA reads something different in the same web content in
Firefox vs. Chrome, it's often our bug, since Firefox has an older, more seasoned accessibility
mapping layer.

> If all the browser - screen reader combinations seem to agree, and the web content still behaves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all the browser-screen reader combinations seem to agree, and the web content still behaves
```

badly, we will need to file a bug on the web content itself, not on the browser.

## Summary

> In summary, ARIA magic can be used to override anything and everything that the HTML says, or add to
> it. It can be used to do little fine changes to the accessibility presentation, or to create an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, ARIA magic can be used to override or add to anything and everything that the HTML says.
It can be used to do little fine changes to the accessibility presentation, or to create an
```

entire experience. This is why ARIA is both incredibly powerful and yet dangerous in the hands of

> our friendly local web authors that don't generally use screen readers themselves. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
our friendly local web authors who don't generally use screen readers themselves. 
```

ARIA is just a dumb truth override markup layer. When a screen reader asks what's happening, if ARIA
exists, they get the ARIA version of the truth instead of the real underlying truth.

## Addendum 1: Additional Resources

### Hybrid reference with keyboard info and code examples

+   [W3C's ARIA Authoring Practices](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices-1.1/): this
    documents the important keyboard navigation characteristics of each example and provides
    working JS/CSS/ARIA code. The examples are focused on what works today, and do not cover mobile.

## Addendum 2: What is ARIA most used for?

> Because ARIA can be used to replace or supplement small or large truths, it's kind of a generally
> useful thing for saying stuff that the screen reader cares about. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because ARIA can replace or supplement small or large truths, generally
useful for saying stuff that the screen reader cares about. 
```

Here are some common uses of ARIA.

> 1.  Special widgets that don't exist in HTML, like a menubar, autocomplete, tree, or spreadsheet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#.  Special widgets that don't exist in HTML, like a menubar, autocomplete, tree, or a spreadsheet.
```

Reviewer: Numbers are for procedures.

> 1.  Widgets that exist in HTML, but the author invented their own anyway, possibly because they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E.  Widgets that exist in HTML, but the author invented their own anyway, possibly because they
```

    needed to tweak the behavior or appearance of the normal widget. For example, an HTML `<input
    type="range">` element is basically a slider, but authors want to make it look different. For

>     most things, CSS can be used, but for `input type="range"`, CSS is very awkward to use. We can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    most things, CSS can be used, but for `input type="range"`, CSS is awkward. An author can
```

>     make our own slider, and use `role="slider"` on it with `aria-valuenow` to say what the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    make their own slider, and use `role="slider"` on it with `aria-valuenow` to say what the current
```

    value is.

> 1.  Live regions tell screen readers "in this area of the page, anything that changes is worth telling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#.  Live regions that tell screen readers, "in this area of the page, anything that changes is worth telling
```

Reviewer: The word 'that' is added so that the bullet has the same grammatical structure as the first two.

    the user about."

> 1.  Landmarks (HTML has equivalents now). These are somewhat like headings, in that they help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#.  Landmarks (HTML has equivalents now). These are somewhat like headings, in that they help
```

    screen reader users find what they want faster. However, they're different in that they contain
    the entire related area. Like, "this container is the main area of the page" and "this
    container over here is a navigation panel". 

## Addendum 3: What's an Accessibility API?

An accessibility API is how a screen reader or other AT knows what's in the page and what's

> happening right now. Examples are MSAA, IA2 and UIA. And that's just Windows! There are two parts to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
happening right now. Examples include MSAA, IA2, and UIA. And that's just Windows! There are two parts to
```

an accessibility API:

> +   A "tree" of objects that represents a container hierarchy. Like Russian nesting dolls,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+   A "tree" of objects that represents a container hierarchy. These are like Russian nesting dolls,
```

Reviewer: Bullets can start with sentence fragments. Within a single bullet, every statement after the first must be a complete sentence.

---
title: |
  ARIA: poison or antidote?
subhead: |
  How lying to screen readers cures accessibility, when it doesn't rub salt in it!
authors:
  - aaronlevanthal

> date: 2020-08-11

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-08-14
scheduled: true
```

> date: 2020-08-14

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-08-13
```

> date: 2020-08-13

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-08-14
```

> date: 2020-08-11

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2020-08-17
```

---
title: |
  ARIA: poison or antidote?
subhead: |
  How lying to screen readers cures accessibility, when it doesn't rub salt in it!
authors:
  - aaronlevanthal
date: 2020-08-14

> scheduled: true

Author: ```suggestion
```
